docs: add documnetation for navigation access control (#2953)
vaadin/docs: articles/security/advanced-topics/navigation-access-control.adoc

=== Navigation Access Checkers

Vaadin Flow provides two implementations of [interfacename]`NavigationAccessChecker` interface: [classname]`AnnotatedViewAccessChecker` and [classname]`RoutePathAccessChecker`.

==== AnnotatedViewAccessChecker

[classname]`AnnotatedViewAccessChecker` works in the same way as the former [classname]`ViewAccessChecker`. It looks for security annotation ([annotationname]`@AnonymousAllowed`, [annotationname]`@PermitAll`, [annotationname]`@RolesAllowed`, or [annotationname]`@DenyAll`) on the target view class. It evaluates them against the current navigation context. [classname]`AnnotatedViewAccessChecker` delegates the check to an instance of [classname]`AccessAnnotationChecker`, that can be extended to provide custom rules.

==== RoutePathAccessChecker

[classname]`RoutePathAccessChecker` evaluates instead the path used to navigate to a view. It requires an implementation of [interfacename]`AccessPathChecker`, that is responsible for the effective path verification.

> The Vaadin spring add-on offers an [interfacename]`AccessPathChecker` implementation based on Spring Security configuration. The path used to navigate to the target view is evaluated using the Spring [interfacename]`WebInvocationPrivilegeEvaluator` component, that applies the rules defined by the request matchers configured for Spring Security.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Vaadin Spring add-on offers an [interfacename]`AccessPathChecker` implementation based on Spring Security configuration. The path used to navigate to the target view is evaluated using the Spring [interfacename]`WebInvocationPrivilegeEvaluator` component, that applies the rules defined by the request matchers configured for Spring Security.
```

}
----
<1> Activates the route path access checker. The implementation is provided by the Vaadin Spring module and exposed as a bean.
<2> Adds a custom navigation access checker, by creating a new instance.
<3> Activates all registered navigation access checker bean, that matches the predicate.
<4> Sets a custom decision resolver.

[IMPORTANT]
If you add the bean definition method in a configuration class extending [classname]`VaadinWebSecurity`, the method must be declared `static`, to prevent bootstrap errors because of circular dependencies in bean definitions.

.Define NavigationAccessControlConfigurer Bean in VaadinWebSecurity Subclass 
[source,java]
----
class SecurityConfig extends VaadinWebSecurity {
    @Bean
    static NavigationAccessControlConfigurer navigationAccessControlConfigurer() {
        return new NavigationAccessControlConfigurer() 
            .withRoutePathAccessChecker()
            .withDecisionResolver(new CustomDecisionResolver());
    }
}
----

Consult the [classname]`NavigationAccessControlConfigurer` Javadoc for more information on how navigation access control can be customized.

[NOTE]

> If [classname]`VaadinWebSecurity` is not used, exposing the [classname]`NavigationAccessControlConfigurer` bean is mandatory to activate navigation access control.

Reviewer: I propose to move it to the beginning of "Spring Projects" section, just after "When using VaadinWebSecurity...". 
Otherwise it is hidden quite much.

---
title: Navigation Access Control
description: Explains navigation access control and how it can be customized.
order: 60
---

= [since:com.vaadin:vaadin@V24.3]#Navigation Access Control#

Navigation Access Control is a Flow security feature in which you can allow or deny the navigation to a certain view based on different and pluggable rules. When active, the access control intercepts navigation events, evaluates all configured rules. It then decides whether the target view should be rendered, or if the access should be denied.

> Navigation Access Control is an improvement and a replacement of the [classname]`ViewAccessChecker` mechanism, that is deprecated since Flow 24.3. It provides annotation-based view security. It also expands the capabilities of the former access checker by introducing a new path-based check and by allowing custom rules, which are set by implementing the [interfacename]`NavigationAccessChecker` interface.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Navigation Access Control is an improvement and a replacement of the [deprecated:com.vaadin:vaadin@V24.3]#[classname]`ViewAccessChecker` mechanism#. It provides annotation-based view security. It also expands the capabilities of the former access checker by introducing a new path-based check and by allowing custom rules, which are set by implementing the [interfacename]`NavigationAccessChecker` interface.
```
